[Docs] ES|QL Data Federation (#146945)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation-quickstart.md

The example uses the [Ookla Open Speedtest dataset](https://github.com/teamookla/ookla-open-data), a publicly accessible collection of internet performance metrics aggregated by geographic tile. Because the bucket allows anonymous access, you can follow along without AWS credentials.

## Before you begin

Make sure you have the following:

- An {{es}} deployment running version 9.5 or later, or a serverless project.
- An [Enterprise subscription](https://www.elastic.co/subscriptions) for {{ech}}, {{ece}}, {{eck}}, or self-managed deployments.
- The cluster `manage` privilege to create data sources.
- The index `manage` privilege to create datasets.

## Quickstart

These steps walk you through registering a data source, creating a dataset, and querying federated data with {{esql}}.

:::::::{stepper}

::::::{step} Register a data source
A data source defines the connection to an external storage system, including its type, region, and credentials. Once registered, any number of datasets can reference it.

This example registers a data source that points at a public S3 bucket with anonymous access.

::::{tab-set}
:group: surface

> :::{tab-item} UI

Reviewer: trying to reconcile the idea of a quickstart with all of the steps having example data in them. maybe a "replace the values and the selections with the ones relevant to your data" or something? :/ some of this feels like more of a tutorial than a quickstart, although I see the value in the examples 😵

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

:sync: ui
1. Go to **Data management** > **{{esql}} Data Federation**.
2. On the **Data sources** tab, click **Connect data source**.
3. Set **Data source type** to **Amazon S3**.
4. Enter `ookla_speedtest` as the **Name**.
5. Set **Region** to `us-east-1`.
6. Under **Authentication**, from the **Preferred method** menu, select **Anonymous**.
7. Click **Connect**.

> :::{dropdown} Show the completed Connect data source flyout

Reviewer: Will stop commenting on screenshots of forms, but I am neg on them

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/ee72ebdfb3899be8d3461c3aab7157ea74da9b43

:::{image} images/data-federation/connect-data-source-anonymous.png
:alt: Connect data source flyout configured for Amazon S3 with anonymous authentication
:width: 450px
:::
:::
:::

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
PUT /_query/data_source/ookla_speedtest
{
  "type": "s3",
  "settings": {
    "region": "us-east-1",
    "auth": "anonymous" <1>
  }
}
```

> 1. Enables anonymous access for public buckets. For private data, supply `access_key` and `secret_key` instead.

Reviewer 2: `auto` never infers anonymous, so the explicit `auth` here is load-bearing; and the private-data path is the inference case.

```suggestion
1. Enables anonymous access for public buckets. Anonymous access is never inferred, so set it explicitly. For private data, supply `access_key` and `secret_key` instead — `auth` can then be omitted, and {{es}} infers `static_credentials` from the keys.
```

Author: I think this annotation dates from an iteration where indeed auto was used, I think we can maybe be more explicit and not emphasize "auto" here :)

> 1. Enables anonymous access for public buckets. For private data, supply `access_key` and `secret_key` instead.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Enables anonymous access for public buckets. For private data, use `auth: 'static_credentials'` with `access_key` and `secret_key` instead.
```

A successful request returns `{"acknowledged": true}`.
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X PUT "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/data_source/ookla_speedtest" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
  "type": "s3",
  "settings": {
    "region": "us-east-1",
    "auth": "anonymous"
  }
}'
```

A successful request returns `{"acknowledged": true}`.
:::

::::

Confirm the data source was created:

::::{tab-set}
:group: surface

:::{tab-item} UI
:sync: ui
The new data source appears on the **Data sources** tab, showing its type and region:

> :::{image} images/data-federation/data-sources-list.png

Reviewer: could you take this screenshot with a narrower viewport so the description field wraps? it is very tiny to read

Author: To be followed up in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/1525

  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

:::{note}
Creating a data source does not validate connectivity to the external system. To verify that a data source is working, create a dataset that references it and run a query. If the credentials or endpoint are incorrect, the query returns an error.
:::
::::::

::::::{step} Create a dataset
A dataset points at specific files within a data source and makes them queryable as a virtual index. It references a data source by name and specifies a resource path that identifies the files to read.

This example creates a dataset over one quarter of Ookla's fixed-broadband performance data. Each Parquet file contains speedtest results aggregated into geographic tiles. The key columns are:

- `avg_d_kbps`, `avg_u_kbps`: average download and upload throughput per tile, in kbps
- `avg_lat_ms`: average latency per tile, in milliseconds
- `tests`, `devices`: number of speedtests and unique devices per tile

::::{tab-set}
:group: surface

:::{tab-item} UI
:sync: ui
1. Select the **Datasets** tab, then click **Add dataset**.
2. Select `ookla_speedtest` as the **Data source**.
3. Enter `speedtest_fixed` as the **Name**.

> 4. In **Resource**, enter `s3://ookla-open-data/parquet/performance/type=fixed/year=2024/quarter=1/*.parquet`.

Reviewer: maybe enter the __ ("resource path") would be helpful. does it need to be fully qualified like this? 

also bulking this out would allow you to put this in a fence which would look better because this line breaks outside of a fence

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/ee72ebdfb3899be8d3461c3aab7157ea74da9b43

}
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X POST "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
  "query": "FROM speedtest_fixed, network_incidents METADATA _index | KEEP _index, category, severity, duration_min, avg_d_kbps, avg_lat_ms | LIMIT 5"
}'
```
:::

::::

The `_index` column shows where each row came from. Columns that do not exist in a given source return `null`. Execution metadata is omitted here:

```json
{
  "columns": [
    { "name": "_index", "type": "keyword" },
    { "name": "category", "type": "keyword" },
    { "name": "severity", "type": "keyword" },
    { "name": "duration_min", "type": "integer" },
    { "name": "avg_d_kbps", "type": "long" },
    { "name": "avg_lat_ms", "type": "long" }
  ],
  "values": [
    ["network_incidents", "outage",      "high",   45, null, null],
    ["network_incidents", "degradation", "medium", 12, null, null],
    ["network_incidents", "outage",      "low",     8, null, null],
    ["speedtest_fixed",   null,           null,   null, 8033,  70],
    ["speedtest_fixed",   null,           null,   null, 10327,  8]
  ]
}
```
::::::

:::::::

> ## Use your own data

Reviewer: could/should this be closer to the place where they want to do this?

Author: Placement is deliberate. This step needs the dataset from step 4 to exist first, and it mirrors the single-source-then-multi-source learning arc.

:::

Credential values are never returned in API responses. When you retrieve a data source, secrets are replaced by `::es_redacted::`.

## Clean up

To remove the resources created in this guide, delete the dataset first because a data source cannot be deleted while datasets reference it. Then delete the data source and the sample index:

::::{tab-set}
:group: surface

:::{tab-item} Console
:sync: console
```console
DELETE /_query/dataset/speedtest_fixed
DELETE /_query/data_source/ookla_speedtest
DELETE /network_incidents
```
:::

:::{tab-item} curl
:sync: curl
```bash
curl -X DELETE "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/dataset/speedtest_fixed" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"

curl -X DELETE "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/_query/data_source/ookla_speedtest" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"

curl -X DELETE "${ELASTICSEARCH_URL}/network_incidents" \
  -H "Authorization: ApiKey ${API_KEY}"
```
:::

::::

## Next steps

- For query performance, pushdown behavior, and current limitations, refer to [query external datasets](esql-data-federation-querying.md).

> - To set up connections and authentication, refer to [connect external data sources](esql-data-federation-sources.md).

Reviewer: can we qualify this in the context of the quickstart? what more would they learn here

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/leemthompo/elasticsearch/commit/ee72ebdfb3899be8d3461c3aab7157ea74da9b43
